Thank you for the opportunity, committee members, and Madam Chair.
Just thought some introductory comments, just trying to give this portfolio some
context,
as it does weigh me down somewhat.
The commerce and consumer affairs portfolio actually
spans 59 statutes, and there's a number of Crown
entities under it. And
it's covering competition, consumer protection, corporate governance, financial
markets, and intellectual property.
And of course, these systems underpin confidence in
our economy. When markets are fair and transparent,
businesses have the confidence to invest.
And I've got the long version of this speech for anyone who wants to
read it, I can send it to them.
But my main point this afternoon, Madam Chair, is to say that
we have a significant program of work
underway to strengthen outcomes for
consumers and improve our competitive natures, and
improve, ultimately, our economic performance as part of this
government's growth agenda. We
recently passed the much
amended and often debated CCCFA, the
Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Amendment bill, and we are
progressing the Financial Markets Conduct
Amendment bill. And again, all while seeking to address
good
balance and access around consumer protections and
access to finance.
The changes will be underpinned by the work of the
FMA. It's an exciting time for the FMA
over the next 12 months.
Government needs to appoint a new chairperson,
and then that chairperson and board,
early next year, will need to
appoint a new chief executive And so I want to acknowledge
Samantha Barrass and the five years that she's had at the
FMA, and the work that she will continue.
And actually, she's got a big piece of work coming because as you all
know, as we've debated in Parliament at length, the
remit of the FMA continues
to grow. Initially, the formation of the FMA
was all about regulating the capital markets.
Now its responsibilities and remit is much broader than
that. And the first thing you will see on the 1st of
July is the responsibility for the regulation and oversight of
consumer credit. Moving from the Comcom
on the terrace off to the FMA, and there will literally
be 35, 40 staff that will transfer over
for the oversight of consumer credit. And the FMA are really excited about that.
It arguably pulls them from the top end of town, more so across
society. Their profile, FMA, will broaden.
One area that they're wanting to get into is around the likes of
car finance and ongoing issues around
that for consumers and borrowers.
And so the profile and work of the FMA continues and, as I
said, new leadership and an exciting time for them
to take on their new responsibilities and come up with a whole new
strategic focus. We've
done one
tranche of the capital markets reforms, and we are
looking at a second tranche. You
would've noticed that today with the climate-related
disclosures and the carve-out that
health and life insurers will be given,
and that is ultimately to try and keep the cost down so we
ensure as many people participating in health and life insurance as
possible. And so the capital market reforms tranche two of the
work,
trying to get more access to capital, trying to
make the NZX an even more open place for business
to go
and to list is our plan, particularly in
our next term. The Commerce Act, you know all about modernizing the
Commerce Act, and I know that thank you for the work that you're doing
there. We believe the reforms will
make it easier for businesses to undertake low risk, pro-competitive
collaboration while strengthening the regime to address
harmful conduct. This is the first big reform in 20 years.
Thank you for the select committee for reporting back and, of course, this
Commerce Amendment Act
awaits its second reading. The exciting thing is, and visiting
Comcom at Solnet House, 44 The Terrace
yesterday, they're really excited, the mergers team
and acquisitions team and that as to the extra powers
that that will give them to get onto some of these
mergers
going forward. The reforms to the Commerce
Commission, of course, they are before
FEC. That's the structural reforms that
will
empower and see more transparent decision-making for
Comcom. Personal banking services, open banking, you know all about that, and the
banks have
responded really well. We've got onto the Patents Amendment Bill, which wasn't
that a lovely night in the during urgency.
Yeah.
At the 11th hour, that piece of legislation comes back, and it was intriguing to
all, to most people, and particularly the TV viewers.
The Copyright Act, you've seen. I've had the music sector in my office
today. They're really excited about what that means for the local music sector
that we announced in Music Month
to extend that copyright for some of our April
Sun and Cuba and icy RED grapes that are expiring,
1977, they're expiring next year, and so they want another 20
years. And so we're expanding those copyrights and that
protection of their work and their income for another 20 years
is our every intention. And so that will too go through select committee
process. Fair trading,
the penalties for breaches have lifted
from a maximum of 600,000 to five million, and so
that sends a really big signal that we're getting
tougher on fair trading breaches, particularly among
some of our bigger corporates. Open banking, and I know the
officials have got lots of great statistics and empirical
evidence as to all the success that that's delivered since we regulated its
rollout late last year, and business banking will be regulated next
year. Plant variety rights, you saw a big announcement there with Zespri and
the likes. That's all good work,
as is our anti-scam alliance.
That is a voluntary code, a voluntary model that's delivering up
some good work amongst our telcos, some
good work amongst our banks.
Even some of the digital platform providers, global ones, are
participating in our anti-scam
alliance, and that has been seen, officials tell me, as a bit of an
exemplar worldwide where it hasn't taken a big stick, but a
carrot, that you guys work together and get this right, and we're seeing
scams at different levels fall. We're seeing the confirmation of payee,
confirming those accounts that you all now do when you're transferring money
across, help with scams for the banks, and also
help with their operational costs as well.
So it's a very broad and ambitious program.
But luckily, they've given it to one of the more young and dynamic members of the
government to oversee who's never short of energy and
commitment. So I bring you all the energy in the world today.
Thank you.
But it will never be matched by my-
Thanks
... friend and opponent, Arena Williams.
Right, let's see that.
Thank you.
She's brought this. It's going to be
All right. Elena Williams. Yeah. Your question.
Minister, I will ask you some questions based on sectors.
I'm quite keen to sift through some of the things that I know we both care
about as well. So let's start with banking.
The OECD were recently in New Zealand.
They presented their findings at the conference we were
at about competition in New Zealand, and identified weak banking competition as one
of the key issues holding back New Zealand's productivity.
They noted the four major banks still hold around 90% of banking assets,
and enjoy unusually high profitability by international standards.
I want to ask you first about margins.
This was a focus of the banking inquiry that you led.
Have any competition changes proposed by your
government improved, or are
designed to improve the lending margins?
I'm particularly interested in small business lending.
Okay. No, and I will refer to
my officials on any of those specifics.
They can now do a bit of work while I just talk broader as
to... and you sat there as an integral part of that 15,
16-month banking inquiry, and I hope you're getting it, if you're getting the banks
back before
we close Parliament at the end of September for one last
presentation on our six-monthly updates.
But what
I can talk about, without the specifics of
margins for SMEs, is that that market has opened
up. We are seeing MB accrediting nine
fintechs to participate in the regime.
There's a further eight applications.
You're seeing accredited organizations that are intermediaries.
You're seeing more products come out that are consumer-facing.
And I think you'll agree, Ms. Williams, that during that
whole banking-
Agree
...
during that whole banking inquiry,
the heat that might've been on banks when it started to when it
finished, was dissipated, and we can put that down to all sorts of things.
But it was probably helped by commodity prices for farmers lifting, particularly
dairy farmers. It was probably helped by successive OCR reductions
and interest rate reductions. It was
probably helped by that capital review that
they instigated. It was helped by the prudential policy that they announced, the
non-statutory committee. And so there were a number of things that came out of that
banking inquiry, and sometimes
sunlight is the great form of disinfectant when we put that
focus on their practices. And you have seen
their willingness to talk in
a more open fashion,
and to work more closely with fintech.
So you look at Westpac and Dosh and that, where due
to political, parliamentary, and public pressure,
they know that if they're not
open and willing to change as the rest of the world is seeing,
then they'll be
regulated accordingly. So I'm really pleased with how the banks are operating and
the relationship with the banks, and I would argue
that their social license and the views of banks is
more positive now than it was two years ago.
That's interesting. Just as a follow-up to that then,
while your officials are thinking about the question on lending margins, which is
something your department reports on, I'm also interested in the share
of small business lending as opposed to big business lending, because that was
something that the OECD highlighted as unusual in international
standards, just the vastness of the spread.
When we're talking about open banking and the changes that we should be
seeing in fintech, that has been live since December 1 last year.
It was a law that both governments have described as breaking up
the stable banking oligopoly, yet today the largest
beneficiaries are the major banks in one subsidiary that
is owned by one of the major banks. Have we designed
the system now to benefit
the incumbents? Is this now something which is operating like an even bigger
moat that is being dug by government?
No, I don't think so. I think we have got
with the opening of
the regulating of open banking for residential on December, Kiwi Bank's actually
got its residential and business banking in place
already. They were given a bit more of an extension, but talking to the chair
only last week, she tells me that they've got that in play.
I think there is more competition out there
for a young couple, say,
that want to buy a house and want to borrow.
I think there's more opportunity for them to get a better rate,
and to get access to credit than there has been for some time.
That's true.
And that is also a reflection of our amends to the
CCCFA too, where
governments had gone this way and then that way, and then we think
that we've hit it somewhere in the middle where there is
the availability of credit and lending.
But
there are also the safeguards for those that aren't bankable.
But bankable young people, whether
she's a policeman and he's a teacher that were missing out on
home loans because their opex was a bit- ...
too high, too many meals out, too much Netflix or whatever.
But decision-makers are seeing through that and have now got the
guidance and backing of our government to see through
that and to bank them. I would argue that's a big part of the
reason why you're seeing 30% of the market now first home buyers,
that this, for the first time in a generation or two, the biggest part of the
housing market
single category is first home buyers, and so that's something to be celebrated.
So I think they're going out there, they're getting great deals, and they're
getting good access to credit, and fundamentally, they're getting into home
ownership, which, as you will know, will mean a better
standard of living as they travel through their latter years.
I agree with that. But I guess that's why I'm asking about the lending
margins and the share to small business.
Those are still structural issues in New Zealand's banking sector which seem to be
getting worse rather than better.
So if we take pressure off from a government level on the banks, which I'm
hearing you advocate for-
Mm
... that spells disaster down the track, I would argue.
But I want to ask you, if Revolut wanted to launch a fully competitive
retail banking product in New Zealand today, do they have a
pathway that doesn't involve a partnership with an incumbent?
And you've pointed me to the fact that MB has accredited nine
fintechs, but my suggestion to you is that at the moment, they don't, that the
department won't be able to accredit them now.
Why is Payments New Zealand not supporting accreditations right now?
Mm-hmm.
And would you guarantee Revolut a
pathway in New Zealand to that accreditation, given that they are knocking on
similar doors in similar economies to ours and we want to be first if we
want a truly-
Mm
... competitive banking sector?
Yeah, no, you raise some really good questions, and I'm going to give you the best
person to answer them.
Okay, Jenna, Reid.
Thanks, minister. So I think you've asked quite a few questions there, so I'll try
and break them down and answer.
Perhaps I could just put, if it is going to be officials, why is Payments New
Zealand not offering accreditation now?
So, MB, under the open banking regime-
Yeah
... under the Customer and Product Data Act, MB is responsible for accrediting-
Yes. Yes
... fintechs and some of those that are accredited
are intermediaries. So that means that they're able to actually work with others,
which means that we don't have to accredit absolutely everybody who utilizes open
banking.
Mm-hmm.
And so I think you've used
Revolut there as an example, who have partnered with someone who already
has accreditation-
Yeah
... and is therefore able to utilize open banking.
Why don't they have a pathway to do it without an incumbent?
I can't answer questions about their specific
pathway. But there is accreditation that's happening, that's successfully
happening, and they've chosen to partner
to be able to utilize open banking. So it is being able to use.
I guess the question for you, Minister, is do you accept that when
large offshore banks come to compete with our incumbents,
we have now designed a system that they must kowtow to them?
Well, we've designed a system, and I think it's a prudent one, where you're talking
about accreditation and-
Yeah
... and the gates that they have to go through.
But I think you'll see,
as time goes on, and we're not as a
mature a market as you see those Revolut
huge
electronic billboards all through Europe and stuff, where its
presence is so great. But we're somewhat behind the eight ball
on that, and so we are just feeling our way into that market
without opening the gates and sending them in.
As you can see, they're having to get accreditation.
They're having to get alignment. And like we do a lot
in this country, and rightly so, to protection of everyone, is that you
have to have a couple of good behavior barriers to get through.
And as time goes on, the power of those providers
and their presence will only increase.
If they- Just a couple of, it may be the relation to the Reserve
Bank license rather than this regime. We're happy to have a look into that.
Because there are over 50 organizations that are getting that additional
accreditation through the intermediaries, so there is a lot of accreditation
happening. We're happy to have a look into that particular one.
The other point I'd just make is,
as well as the open banking, there's also the payment services regulation work
which is underway and in consultation.
So that's another key work stream to try and get additional
competition at the engines to compete with the
major banks.
Just to close out this line of inquiry, at the Chair's indulgence.
We have an economic development minister who has promised, I
think rightly, to roll out the red carpet for a competitor with the supermarket
duopoly.
Mm.
Why do we now have a commerce minister who is essentially proposing to dig
the moat deeper around the-
No
... incumbent bank?
No.
Not at all. We have a system
where we are accrediting fintechs,
and we are accrediting intermediaries, and there are a
number of players that are in the market now, and there are better
services
that are being provided, and there are better deals that are being achieved,
and there are more players out there in the economy.
And so we are certainly heading in the right direction.
But we also need to tread carefully in a regulatory
space. One thing you saw, another thing
out of our banking inquiry was
the non-bank deposit takers, that the Reserve Bank has come out in the
last few weeks and said the 15 of them can now be
called banks.
And so again, you're seeing a liberalization of
it across the sector. And
so, if anything, it's certainly
not pointing to
protecting the big four, but
more so towards opening up competition to enable
others to gain more market share in a prudent
and responsible way as we track through this decade.
Yeah. Any questions on this
topic? No. You have another topic?
Oh, I could just ask one more, very short.
One more, yeah, sure.
Just to Nick. So
is the payments licensing going ahead as normal?
Why can Payments New Zealand not accredit something like Revolut right now?
So I don't have the answer to that, but we're happy to follow up
to the committee on that point.
That would be great.
Yeah.
The other point I'll just make on this general area is there has been,
the Approved Investor Plus visa has had a lot of
investment coming in, and a lot of that's gone to private credit.
Mm.
So that's
not from the major banks. But that is
lending that's going into growing businesses- ...
that'll be in those mid-size growth area, which has been an ongoing
area where we've been worried about as a gap, and the OECD was as well, in terms of
a gap. So that is actually a positive sign, I think, as well.
You have a question, Ricardo?
I do, yeah. Just if you wouldn't mind outlining, in
light of the
extreme weather events we've had and the damage that people have seen through their
homes, do you think that the budgeted amounts for the insurance claims resolution
is sufficient? There's been a reduction.
Mm.
But yeah, would you mind
just outlining if you think that's adequate considering the-
Well-
... state of the country
... yes. And that
budget,
the Crown funding continues for another year.
Cabinet has not
made any decisions on the
New Zealand Claims Resolution Office.
So no decisions have been made. We know that there
are not just those that are going through long-time disputes
around severe weather events and that, but there's
also a number of them that
are ongoing sales in properties in Christchurch,
going back
to the earthquakes of 2010 and 2011.
And so, the New Zealand Claims Resolution Office continues to
do its work.
No decisions have been made, but you're right,
the funding
is in place and has been reduced.
We've got another
year mapped out already.
But you've also got to remember that they are winding up a lot of these historic
cases, and we're getting on to second generation, where Christchurch
resale properties are now going into dispute on properties that they
bought off someone who thought they'd got something fixed when it hadn't, and
everything else. And so, like a lot of things,
the claims are getting less and less.
But we're treating this, Mr. Mendes-March, with great
sensitivity because we know that the reason these people
are at the New Zealand Claims Resolution Office is because
they are at wit's end, and they are
still suffering PTSD in many cases.
And so, that office,
if you meet with them as I have
recently, that office is full of people that just take
so much individual care and passion with their
claimants and with their disputes,
that we will be continuing to work through with the resource that's
fallen to reflect the number of resolutions that have happened in recent
years, to deal with it as sensitively
and as expeditiously as we can. But we've
realized that the funding is limited.
Mm-hmm.
But that doesn't mean it's going to be a reflection of less care
or less service.
Thank you for the thorough answer. I may just move quickly to another topic.
You mentioned in your introduction remarks a series of legislative
changes.
May I just ask
whether you intend to continue progressing this term with the retail payments ban
on surcharges-
Oh. Oh, well, you know, there's-
... Amendment Bill.
Yes.
We have some suggestions.
Yes. Oh, well, good. I know, and I have some.
You two of you have some-
And I have some suggestions.
Yeah.
Me as well. Dr.
Palmer has already made some announcements.
But
look,
eight weeks in the job, we continue.
It's a big piece of work that continues.
The National Party caucus position is that we
will. That has not changed, that we will
ban merchant surcharging fees. But we've
also written to Comcom and asked them to do
some analysis
around the
monitoring. There's been two rounds of interchange fee reductions
as to can they, with MB, get a sense of the
impact of what this has actually meant.
You saw, I think the first change was under the previous
administration in '22, and then we had a interchange fee
reduction in
end of last year, 1 December. And now you're seeing that we're going out on
consultation, Comcom's going out on consultation on a
reduction of interchange fees,
and for merchant fees for
commercial cards, for company cards, I think is probably the right
terminology. And that closes,
that's open consultation now. So a lot of work's being done
on analyzing just where we're at after two
major interchange fee reductions, and is it being
passed on, and what are our options?
Mm-hmm.
Can I just follow up on that? So two things you mentioned, and acknowledge
you've been eight weeks in the job. I take that.
But when you say you're doing a piece of work on this, are you saying
you're considering amendments to the legislation to then bring it
back? Or are you just looking at work in other areas and just
letting the bill languish in the order paper?
Oh, look, no. No, we are actively
working through some very
complicated issues, and ones that are hard to get a
commercial handle on,
as far as how much of these interchange fees have been passed on.
What is the real cost now to
merchants? Are- ... consumers are still
paying excessive
fees compared to what merchants are
charging, are paying. What's the marginal difference?
And so we're just continuing to try and get a handle on
that
piece, those interchange fee reductions from December 1,
and also looking at commercial cards.
But we're
open to all input. I've been meeting with different advocacy groups on
both sides of it. You meet with
Consumer NZ and listen to their perspective, and they're
saying 80, 90% of our people say that they
should be banned. And I kind of argue, well, probably 89, 90% would probably
say tax should be banned too.
So they come from the consumer perspective, and so I put my consumer minister hat
on there. And then I come out the other door and meet with
Caroline Young from Retail New Zealand, and she says,
"No, we're very happy with where it's at for now because it's a tough time for
small business." And so there's
some balancing considerations that we don't go into this piece of work
lightly.
Do you have any timeframes that you're able to give to the public on when you're
hoping to give them clarity on whether you'll progress with this piece of work or
not?
Oh, well,
as I said, once we've commissioned and got some clarity from the work that
Comcom's doing and the ongoing work that
MBIE's doing
about payment costs and what's being passed on or what isn't, and
where the sector is, because the
number of
merchants that are actually
surcharging now is around 20%, and we need to get a handle. Has that lessened?
Have
some of them dropped from 3 to 2% or are we just in a
locked situation where
they're not moving? And if so, are there other ways of getting
merchants, retailers to drop their
fees without a legislative form? Can
we put more pressure on them
by firing off letters instructing Comcom to take
more of a lead on this? And so we're looking at all our options.
So
are we going to be able to get it into the next 28 days
of legislative time that we have in Parliament
before it rises in three and a half months?
That could be a challenge.
Just a quick question on that. What is your timeline?
What is your expectation to get this information from Comcom and
MBIE? The analysis that you're awaiting.
Oh, well, yeah, and look, I
probably need to sit down again with Comcom and sit down again with MBIE and just
say, "What are you able to give us now?" Because we're going to have to draw a
line on it. We're not just going to keep rolling it through, but
again, we also don't want to make any decisions in
haste.
So again, my personal, I
would like to see us make a decision on this in this
term of government, obviously. And so we're just working towards that.
So that means there is no timeline set from your end at this stage
for-
No
... receiving that information?
No, but again, I put the message out here for those
sitting in Comcom today are watching this first-class
presentation. And MBIE, I know there's room full of people
watching this as well,
for them to, let's have a meeting. Nick and Jenna, let's have a meeting and
let's put all the options on the table.
Let's see what empirical and anecdotal data we have, and
is this
still big enough problem that we want to try and fix
or is it solving itself? And so those are the issues that we need to meet.
Okay.
But the National Party caucus, their position remains the
same, that they want to see merchant surcharges banned.
But the timing will be everything.
And let's not forget, it's a difficult time for small business as well.
It is. Aruna Williams, you have a supplement?
Just a quick one. Just because you raised the position of Retail New Zealand,
and I wanted to put to you some of the publicly
reported comments from Caroline recently have been that the Labor and
Nationals position seems to be that it would be an acceptable-
Aruna, you have a question?
Yes
Yeah. If you could ask.
Solution for
the banks to be paying the costs involved in that.
I want to ask you about whether that is something you are actively
looking into. It also relates to the work you're doing with
Payments New Zealand.
In one situation, the rails are owned by Visa,
MasterCard. In one situation, the rails are owned by the big banks.
Both of these are critical infrastructure, and we've got ourselves into trouble
here because small businesses are paying the cost.
Yep. And look, again, MBIE,
we're publicly consulting now on
payment service providers, and that consultation, for those that are interested,
closes on the 3rd of July. And
that is a broader piece of work that's being done
as well. And so,
yeah, we'll just continue to work with
all the stakeholders, gather as much information as we can so we can make an
informed decision. And noting that this is a
sensitive time for SMEs,
but it's also something that we've committed to.
And as I've suggested, there's other ways of potentially
implementing this. You've put it to me, can we stop it at the
bank so it doesn't get to the merchants?
That is something that has been put out there.
Another thing, and you and I have talked about it, what about a cap?
Is there a kind of a universal cap? Some subscribe to 1%,
and then the others say, well, if you put a 1% cap as a
kind of an arbitrary average, does that mean that other businesses just-
Put their stuff up 1%. And so there's also Australia
with their merchant surcharge ban that is, I understand, yet to
be implemented,
but has led the charge by their central bank, their reserve
bank,
and
seeing how that unfurls as well. So there's a lot of moving parts in this, and
we just want to
do it once and do it well. And then there's a case of
if we haven't got the support in government, who else is
prepared to come around the table?
And I can see a big press conference with Arena Williams and Cameron Brewer
the future of parliament kind of all in one room.
Okay.
Oh my goodness.
But your amendments, we know you've got those amendments, Arena-
People should note that
... and we see some difficulty with those as-
Do you have a supplementary still?
No. Primary.
Oh, it's gone. Oh, you're primary, okay. Yeah.
I'm just interested, Minister. I think I heard you say that scams
were falling.
This-
In some categories.
Okay, I'll be interested in your answer to that because it flies in the face of
what
Casey Casell and John McKeay have done in terms of addressing organized crime.
That's a big issue now.
The second largest by a long way is financial crime,
and this is money moving through banks.
Mm.
So I'm just interested in where that information and what categories.
Oh, well, probably, and I'll ask my officials.
We've got a lot of
anti-scam alliance
experts here. But I did point to perhaps some
categories we are seeing
things improve, and I suppose that probably came off the back of me talking
about confirmation of payee.
Mm-hmm.
That that's
now that everyone has to kind of go through a system of name and
account number and then check it
amber, green or
red kind of.
That has helped.
That has slowed things down.
But we also know that New Zealand has lost a gross of
265 million
in the year to October 2025, and so
this work continues. But when you go
into the cyber
center, defense center of Spark or anywhere where these big
telcos have got now, and the level of
technology and resource that they are pouring into this,
it's impressive. But as far as where we might be seeing some wins and
where we know that it's a forever-changing landscape and where the
challenges continue to present themselves, I'll
refer to
the officials if they've got any good examples of where the wins are and where the
challenges remain.
I think we might need to come back to you with further information on that.
That'd be great.
Yeah.
But we don't kid ourselves that-
Does that-
... overall things are getting sweeter.
It's just getting harder to do, but we're having some wins.
Great.
I don't know whether-
Just a quick follow-up on this. Dr.
David Wilson has been a
real advocate on the scam side, and I was interested to see that just
a week ago, your Australian counterpart is
suggesting
a automatic reimbursement for scam losses below a dollar
amount. Is that something that you could see New Zealand following suit
with? Have you seen some advice on that?
Look, I haven't sought any advice on that, but let's have a look at what
Australia's doing.
We know that they've gone big in a federal sense in
setting up their anti-scam center.
There is some debate raging across the Tasman as
to whether that's achieved anything more than New Zealand's
achieving by not setting up a large bureaucracy,
but rather coming in with a voluntary code and a voluntary
model of all the main players,
and coming together every month and
working on their next projects and having that resourced by MBIE and others.
And that is having some good effect.
If you talk to those ASA members, they will say that it's
working well across. If you're talking to the NZ Bankers
Association or whoever, they'll say we're getting some good wins off this, and
we're seeing the top players engaged, including the international
digital platforms
in some examples.
And
we are making some headway on this, although the challenges are profound.
Mm.
With the Australians proposing an under $3,000
automatic repayment for scams, that would suggest to me
that some of the banks that you meet with who are saying that their IT
systems just aren't up to that, it would incentivize a massive build-out, I guess,
if you had that kind of punitive system.
With your consumer's hat on,
when the Australians are getting refunded for every scam that's under three grand
automatically and Kiwis aren't, they're on the same sites, they're on Facebook,
they're on Google. Why are we not lining up with the same kind of consumer
protection?
Yeah. Well, and I'll see if anyone else has got anything to
add on that. I'm happy to seek some advice as to the
level of loss still that can be pointed to our banks
and also the level of compensation that they are paying.
I don't have a clear indication of that, but I'm happy to seek advice on it.
Okay.
Yeah, I don't think we've explored that in any depth at this stage.
Mm.
That's good. So-
May I have a primary?
In your primary, yeah.
Thank you. The next sort of area that I want to focus on with you
is an area of passion for me. It's standards and safety.
Mm.
I'll just tell you all the things.
Yes. Yeah.
Asbestos sand.
Mm.
Toy batteries, asbestos contaminated fire doors, increase in lead
taps, blind cords that pose a serious risk to children-
Mm
... failing imported windows that are creating wall system leakage.
There are times when- Your vote seems to be making
savings in standards,
and across MB we're asking for baseline savings
that seem ambitious, but these things seem to be getting worse.
And I guess I'm not asking you to solve this problem of product safety.
You can't catch everything. But given that these things
seem to be increasing, not only in reporting, but also in the
public's mind, especially when it comes to children's products,
is government going in the wrong direction?
No, not at all.
We have a full cabinet. I'm
not privy to any of their discussions at full cabinet.
But they have a principle, and it might follow on from the previous
administration too, where we're
keen to align with Australia as much as we can.
But only where we're not dropping standards.
And so you're seeing alignment with Australia on product safety
standards, you're seeing alignment with Australia on toy safety
standards, on food safety standards and that because it makes little
sense
for our consumers and others to be missing out
on products,
or for importers,
international businesses not being able to deal with New Zealand because we've got
our own bespoke regulatory regime.
As consumer affairs
minister, I'm very confident that the standards are being upheld.
On the corded blind issue,
I share your concerns. This is one that we've had three
coroner's reports in the last
five years. We've had three children
killed in the last five years because of corded
blinds that have been flapping and
have caused
fatalities. In fact, since 2007,
we've had eight children that have been killed
because of
window coverings and corded blinds particularly.
And
60% of the products
do comply to a higher standard that other jurisdictions
have, whether it's EU, US,
Canada or Australia. And so, i.e.,
when I went in and bought a couple of roller blinds lately, and it
wasn't the most expensive purchase one would witness, but
from a big bulk place and put them up there.
I also had to put that fastener in alongside.
And so people are more
cognizant and conscious of the safety aspects, and they're
looking in the boxes to see if they have got fasteners.
This issue, and I know that it's one, the corded blind one is a sensitive
one. There are families still in profound grief because of it.
This issue is under active and serious
consideration.
And we as a government have every
intention
of progressing it.
Okay.
And not to
probe a sensitive issue, but I think what I've heard is that you don't intend for
savings to be found from
the allocation around savings, particularly of things like these building
products, which are also consumer products.
But at a time when New Zealand is changing and deregulating its rules
around overseas building products, you can see how important it is for
families to then have some assurance that on your side of the ledger,
as minister responsible for safety standards, that things like blinds and asbestos
doors
and lead taps are continuing to receive the same sort of
monitoring. Is that right?
Well, and I'll talk to our operational experts here
on
is the monitoring of safety products or those that aren't complying and
have we got as great oversight as we should have, and are there any
budget implications on products becoming less safe or
less regulated or less monitored in New Zealand because of
any budgetary decisions. And I think I know the answer already, but
I'll let them talk to that. But just on a couple of things as far as
where we've invested in
consumer safety campaigns. Button battery safety
campaign. You saw that late February
to early April this year, with Safekids Aotearoa to help
children protected from the dangers of ingesting button batteries.
And that got huge hits. Toy Safety Week
2025, October with partnership with Plunket Safekids,
Aotearoa Health New Zealand, the Comcom to educate families and whanau on the
safety features of choosing safe toys.
And so we are investing in campaigns like that, and
we are continuing to investigate in the regulation
and oversight of safe products in New Zealand.
And I'll just get my officials to say if there's any concerns from
them as to whether
products inadvertently become consumer products,
particularly pointing to, say, children,
are becoming any less safe because of any claims around
budget constraints.
Is
that team losing any funding?
In this budget, there was a 2%
savings to a number of areas. So I'd have to check
the exact appropriation. It might have been a minor level.
But that was not necessarily that particular team, so we could
potentially come back to the committee on whether it affected that particular
team because it was a sort of across MB, across the department we needed to make
savings.
That would be good.
Sorry, I've just checked, and no, there was no change to the team.
Great. Thank you. Just on the button batteries
Not to sound like the ACT Party here, but why is the taxpayer paying for that?
Why won't you go-
What does that mean?
Oh, jeez.
The issue is that-
Jeez
... those toys are being sold by one of New Zealand's biggest-
Yeah
... box retailers that is crushing New Zealand businesses and selling the same
sorts of products. Why won't the government ask Kmart to foot the bill for what are
dangerous products being sold to children?
Well, the biggest Kmart in New Zealand, 24/7, is opening
in Westgate on the 1st of July, so just to plug that for them.
Oh, conflict. Conflict.
Conflict. But
look, I don't know who the... There would've been a partnership, a consortium no
doubt, that came in behind and sponsored the button battery
campaign.
But, I take your point, that the big
corporates and the big manufacturers have a role to play here.
But you need to have every assurance that
you will continue to see safety improvement, consumer safety
improvements being announced from the Minister of Consumer Affairs in the
coming months and years.
Okay. All right, Ricardo.
Have you had any engagement with your Australian counterparts
on the issue of excessive pricing by supermarkets?
And are you looking at potentially following suit with
proposals to
legislate against those?
Well, as you know, the
whole issue around supermarkets
continues to be led by
the Minister of Finance, the Honorable Nicola Willis.
She's the one that talks on
supermarket competition and the likes.
So I don't have a comment there, but no, to answer your question, no, I haven't
talked to my Australian counterparts.
But this Comcom report, and I was visiting Comcom
yesterday,
and it talks about their
annual grocery report. And yes, we've still got a long way to go.
We've improved a lot of regulation and express
lanes for resource consents and restrictions on land
banking, and we've tried our hardest.
The settings are there now for a third player.
We haven't achieved a major third player in there, but what you are
seeing
from Comcom's report
is you are seeing, and I point to page eight of this
2025 annual grocery report released recently,
you are seeing some regional and planned store openings that are
making a real difference
in Auckland. And these, again, are not necessarily big players,
but you talk to our good friends in Christchurch,
Dr. Hamish Campbell and Dr. Vanessa Wingett and others.
Even, he's not Christchurch, but he claims to be sometimes,
Dr. James Meagher. James Meagher, the Honorable James Meagher.
They will say that there are some great stores.
Maybe he was talking about Save More in Timaru, Harvest Market in Christchurch,
Wang Korea Food Market in Christchurch, Kaiko in Christchurch.
All these middle-size operators that are having a real impact-
Mm-hmm
... on the supermarket sector in Canterbury.
And we're also seeing, Comcom's pointed to Plenty Foods in Upper
Hutt and
a place in Nelson, and Reduced to Clear in Taranaki, and places in
Auckland as well. And so Costco, dairy
planned. We know, as the MP for
Costco, which has been handed over in November by
Chris Penk,
because you're just overseeing the congestion as the local
MP for Costco. But we know anecdotally
that the impact of Costco arriving in the northwest of
Auckland
has had downward pressure on our
nearby supermarkets on price competitiveness.
And so when it comes to South Auckland, to dairy, you can expect the
same. But let's not forget there's other pressure elements out there, Chemist
Warehouse and other competitors, where we're seeing some real
competition in traditional grocery store purchases.
Okay.
So the minister elaborated quite a bit despite
that
being a sector looked after by another minister. So I will allow a follow-up.
It's also about the competition piece.
Yeah.
Thank you. Yes, mine is also about the competition part.
For the minister, yeah. Depends what you can answer though.
This
Commerce Commission report is really useful.
It also highlighted that the major supermarkets still hold more than 80% of the
national market for grocery, and margins profitability were relatively flat,
and that retail prices are increasing, not decreasing.
So I wanted to ask you why in Budget
2026 have you removed funding for the standalone grocery commissioner
before the law to weaken his role has even been passed?
Well,
you would've seen, as part of our statutory
changes, that
the Grocery Commissioner and the Telecommunications Commissioner,
their terms will not be renewed. But they're only about halfway through their
terms. It's a five-year term. And so both
of them have got roles to play, and officers can correct me if I'm
wrong, but those responsibilities and that
advocacy
will be contained
within government. And so whatever the
responsibilities are of the Grocery Commissioner now and the
Telecommunications Commissioner will be retained, and will be
called upon, and will be used. So yes,
a named commissioner that
the media can't run to and set up and do an interview won't be there.
But the resource will still be fed into that, and the
capability will still be there.
Okay.
Yeah, it's just one of the
Other categories, the enforcement of competition regulation has actually increased,
so there's been a funding transfer.
Yes.
Not its own budget line, but one-
Yeah, so you're confirming a funding transfer.
That's right.
Yeah.
So there was
consolidation of three different appropriations, and that will give the Commerce
Commission more flexibility in terms of how they fund.
So that's for liquid fuels monitoring enforcement, retail payment systems,
administration enforcement, and grocery industry monitoring enforcement.
So if at a time when there was, say, a fuel price
rise in New Zealand that was concerning the Commerce Commission, you might expect
the resources that had been used by the grocery commissioner to
be reused in, say, the fuel area.
That's right. Exactly right. If there's a spike somewhere that you'd
want to put the resource into that place that needs the attention.
Okay.
So the funding remains the same, but it's just consolidation of the three.
One more on grocery?
Yeah.
I just wanted to ask you about the grocery commissioner role.
Do you foresee that being any less visible than it has been,
given the changes? Would you expect budget that had been
used in the grocery scene to be used elsewhere?
Well, we're seeing a kind of transference of funding, aren't we?
That's right.
More so than a loss of funding.
Debate will rage as to whether this should be a single person or whether it should
just be a capability within the Commerce Commission, and,
no. I think it's been an important time
to have a grocery commissioner. If you had to pick out five
years out of the last 25 years, it's probably about now
to have a grocery commissioner. But we kind of see that their role, when that
role runs out in the next couple of years, will be replaced
with just as good a capability, if not more,
within that department. So we have every confidence that the issues around
groceries and the monitoring of them and the commentary around
them from the likes of Comcom will continue.
And I just want to pay tribute to the Commerce Commission and MBIE on
the work they've done around the fuel crisis.
Here's hoping that work lessens, not grows, in the coming weeks and
months. But when you visit these organizations and see the teams
that have been thrown together and
see the redness in the whites of their eyes for some of the work they've had to do,
and it's actually,
if there was ever something positive to come out of
this, Ms. Williams, it's their capability, their knowledge of the
whole fuel supply system, of fuel
security, of impacts. MPs, I've received
letters from many of you asking about fuel differentials in
some of your towns and suburbs over other areas, and it's really
forced MBIE and Comcom to up their
knowledge base about the whole issue and the whole supply chain
around fuel and the pricing and costing of it.
And so, again, I just want to thank the work that they've done since
the end of February.
I just wanted to ask you about MBIE's reporting work on that.
Critical to understanding what's going on and also enabled by the Retail
Fuel Act, I think 2020 is the date on that legislation.
Why is MBIE reporting less, not more,
on fuel price data at a time of a fuel price shock?
Well, I'll defer to the chief executive on-- refer to the chief executive on
that one.
Is this referring to the margins-
Bring the margin price data back, please.
Yeah. I believe we do have a plan to bring that back, but again,
let me confirm with the committee about the exact timing of
that.
Minister, do you think that's suitable?
Well, look, again,
there's operational reasons in that, and I don't think
New Zealand is a short of fuel data at the moment.
I don't think there's a consumer wondering, "How the hell do I work out
what's going on around the country?" I think the transparency of fuel
pricing and fuel data
in a real-time sense is better than it ever has been.
I guess-
And the Commerce Commission does have margin data as well-
That's right
... which they are tracking very closely.
That's true.
Okay. I guess what it shows, Minister, is the last time MBIE
reported on it, the wholesale price of diesel was up here, and
it was tracking down, and then MBIE stopped reporting.
So I guess I'm asking you about public confidence in the system.
How do New Zealanders look at that data and go, "Well, we've got a government on
our side that's telling us that the trends are moving in the right direction in
terms of pricing."
Yeah.
It goes to my colleague Ricardo Menéndez Marchant's point about the
Australians looking very closely at pricing dynamics in their law.
We are not doing that in our law, but are we doing it in our reporting?
Are we doing enough sunlight?
Look, as I said, I think New Zealanders are well-served
around fuel pricing, around transparency, around the abilities and
the powers that the Commerce Commission have.
The team that they have up in Solnet House that is dedicated to
the ongoing monitoring of this
and the ongoing reporting of this to the government and to
the public. So I'm not getting any ministerial letters
saying, "We don't know what's going on around fuel pricing." I think
this one
small thing, positive thing that's come out of this whole Middle Eastern crisis is,
I think, a better understanding, and rightly so, consumers wanting
to know more, too.
All right. Ricardo Menéndez Marchant.
What would be the rationale for not currently reporting on the data?
My recollection
at the start was that because of the way things were changing very
quickly, they weren't confident in the-
Mm.
In it being able to explain exactly what was going on.
Yeah.
But I have been surprised that we haven't put it back in place yet, so I am going
to follow up about why that's the case.
Yeah. All right.
Okay.
Would you have any timeframes on when you think you may be able to put it back?
I'm going to follow up with the team when I get back to the office.
So they will get back to us with information.
So we'll get back with a timeframe.
Yeah.
Please.
Thank you so much for that. Any other questions, members?
Final
question, if any.
No. Thank you.
All right. Looks like that's all. Thank you so much, Minister.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, members.
And there might be some written follow-up questions.
Yes, there will be.
Thank you.
No, thank you. Thank you.
And thanks to your officials as well.
Thank you to everyone.
Yep. Thank you, members.